Chapter 1: Cell structure  11  Chapter 1: Cell structure Learning outcomes You should be able to: describe and compare the structure of animal, plant and bacterial cells, and discuss the noncellular nature of viruses ■■ describe the use of light microscopes and electron microscopes to study cells ■■ draw and measure cell structures ■■  discuss the variety of cell structures and their functions ■■ describe the organisation of cells into tissues and organs ■■ outline the role of ATP in cells ■■  Cambridge International AS Level Biology  Thinking outside the box Progress in science often depends on people thinking ‘outside the box’ – original thinkers who are often ignored or even ridiculed when they first put forward their radical new ideas. One such individual, who battled constantly throughout her career to get her ideas accepted, was the American biologist Lynn Margulis (born 1938, died 2011: Figure 1.1). Her greatest achievement was to use evidence from microbiology to help firmly establish an idea that had been around since the mid-19th century – that new organisms can be created from combinations of existing organisms which are not necessarily closely related. The organisms form a symbiotic partnership, typically by one engulfing the other – a process known as endosymbiosis. Dramatic evolutionary changes result. The classic examples, now confirmed by later work, were the suggestions that mitochondria and chloroplasts were originally free-living bacteria (prokaryotes) which invaded the ancestors of modern eukaryotic cells (cells with nuclei). Margulis saw such symbiotic unions as a major driving cause of 22  In the early days of microscopy an English scientist, Robert Hooke, decided to examine thin slices of plant material. He chose cork as one of his examples. Looking down the microscope, he was struck by the regular appearance of the structure, and in 1665 he wrote a book containing the diagram shown in Figure 1.2. If you examine the diagram you will see the ‘porelike’ regular structures that Hooke called ‘cells’. Each cell appeared to be an empty box surrounded by a wall. Hooke had discovered and described, without realising it, the fundamental unit of all living things. Although we now know that the cells of cork are dead, further observations of cells in living materials were made by Hooke and other scientists. However, it was not until almost 200 years later that a general cell theory emerged from the work of two German scientists. In 1838 Schleiden, a botanist, suggested that all plants are made of cells, and a year later Schwann, a zoologist, suggested the same for animals. The cell theory states that the basic unit of structure and function of all living organisms is the cell. Now, over 170 years later, this idea is one of the most familiar and important theories in biology. To it has been added Virchow’s theory of 1855 that all cells arise from pre-existing cells by cell division.  evolutionary change. She continued to challenge the Darwinian view that evolution occurs mainly as a result of competition between species.  Figure 1.1 Lynn Margulis: ‘My work more than didn’t fit in. It crossed the boundaries that people had spent their lives building up. It hits some 30 sub-fields of biology, even geology.’  Figure 1.2 Drawing of cork cells published by Robert Hooke in 1665.  Chapter 1: Cell structure  Why cells? A cell can be thought of as a bag in which the chemistry of life is allowed to occur, partially separated from the environment outside the cell. The thin membrane which surrounds all cells is essential in controlling exchange between the cell and its environment. It is a very effective barrier, but also allows a controlled traffic of materials across it in both directions. The membrane is therefore described as partially permeable. If it were freely permeable, life could not exist, because the chemicals of the cell would simply mix with the surrounding chemicals by diff usion.  eyepiece  light beam  objective cover slip  Cell biology and microscopy  glass slide  The study of cells has given rise to an important branch of biology known as cell biology. Cells can now be studied by many different methods, but scientists began simply by looking at them, using various types of microscope. There are two fundamentally different types of microscope now in use: the light microscope and the electron microscope. Both use a form of radiation in order to create an image of the specimen being examined. The light microscope uses light as a source of radiation, while the electron microscope uses electrons, for reasons which are discussed later.  condenser  Light microscopy  The ‘golden age’ of light microscopy could be said to be the 19th century. Microscopes had been available since the beginning of the 17th century but, when dramatic improvements were made in the quality of glass lenses in the early 19th century, interest among scientists became widespread. The fascination of the microscopic world that opened up in biology inspired rapid progress both in microscope design and, equally importantly, in preparing material for examination with microscopes. This branch of biology is known as cytology. Figure 1.3 shows how the light microscope works. By 1900, all the structures shown in Figures 1.4 and 1.5 had been discovered. Figure 1.4 shows the structure of a generalised animal cell and Figure 1.5 the structure of a generalised plant cell as seen with a light microscope. (A generalised cell shows all the structures that are typically found in a cell.) Figure 1.6 shows some actual human cells and Figure 1.7 shows an actual plant cell taken from a leaf.  Eyepiece lens magnifies and focuses the image from the objective onto the eye.  iris diaphragm light source pathway of light  Objective lens collects light passing through the specimen and produces a magnified image. Condenser lens focuses the light onto the specimen held between the cover slip and slide. Condenser iris diaphragm is closed slightly to produce a narrow beam of light.  Figure 1.3 How the light microscope works. 3  Golgi body  small structures that are difficult to identify  cytoplasm mitochondria  cell surface membrane  nuclear envelope centriole – always found near nucleus, has a role in nuclear division  chromatin – deeply staining and thread-like  nucleus  nucleolus – deeply staining  Figure 1.4 Structure of a generalised animal cell (diameter about 20 μm) as seen with a very high quality light microscope.  Cambridge International AS Level Biology  tonoplast – membrane surrounding vacuole cell surface membrane (pressed against cell wall)  middle lamella – thin layer holding cells together, contains calcium pectate plasmodesma – connects cytoplasm of neighbouring cells  vacuole – large with central position  cell wall of neighbouring cell  cytoplasm cell wall mitochondria  chloroplast  nucleolus – deeply staining nucleus  grana just visible  nuclear envelope chromatin – deeply staining and thread-like  small structures that are difficult to identify Golgi apparatus  Figure 1.5 Structure of a generalised plant cell (diameter about 40 μm) as seen with a very high quality light microscope.  4  Figure 1.6 Cells from the lining of the human cheek (× 400), each showing a centrally placed nucleus, which is a typical animal cell characteristic. The cells are part of a tissue known as squamous (flattened) epithelium.  QUESTION 1.1 Using Figures 1.4 and 1.5, name the structures  that animal and plant cells have in common, those found in only plant cells, and those found only in animal cells.  Figure 1.7 Photomicrograph of a cells in a moss leaf (×400).  Chapter 1: Cell structure  Animal and plant cells have features in common  Differences between animal and plant cells  In animals and plants each cell is surrounded by a very thin cell surface membrane. This is also sometimes referred to as the plasma membrane. Many of the cell contents are colourless and transparent so they need to be stained to be seen. Each cell has a nucleus, which is a relatively large structure that stains intensely and is therefore very conspicuous. The deeply staining material in the nucleus is called chromatin and is a mass of loosely coiled threads. This material collects together to form visible separate chromosomes during nuclear division (page 98). It contains DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), a molecule which contains the instructions that control the activities of the cell (see Chapter 6). Within the nucleus an even more deeply staining area is visible, the nucleolus, which is made of loops of DNA from several chromosomes. The number of nucleoli is variable, one to five being common in mammals. The material between the nucleus and the cell surface membrane is known as cytoplasm. Cytoplasm is an aqueous (watery) material, varying from a fluid to a jelly-like consistency. Many small structures can be seen within it. These have been likened to small organs and hence are known as organelles. An organelle can be defined as a functionally and structurally distinct part of a cell. Organelles themselves are often surrounded by membranes so that their activities can be separated from the surrounding cytoplasm. This is described as compartmentalisation. Having separate compartments is essential for a structure as complex as an animal or plant cell to work efficiently. Since each type of organelle has its own function, the cell is said to show division of labour, a sharing of the work between different specialised organelles. The most numerous organelles seen with the light microscope are usually mitochondria (singular: mitochondrion). Mitochondria are only just visible, but films of living cells, taken with the aid of a light microscope, have shown that they can move about, change shape and divide. They are specialised to carry out aerobic respiration. The use of special stains containing silver enabled the Golgi apparatus to be detected for the first time in 1898 by Camillo Golgi. The Golgi apparatus is part of a complex internal sorting and distribution system within the cell (page 15). It is also sometimes called the Golgi body or Golgi complex.  The only structure commonly found in animal cells which is absent from plant cells is the centriole. Plant cells also differ from animal cells in possessing cell walls, large permanent vacuoles and chloroplasts.  Centrioles  Under the light microscope the centriole appears as a small structure close to the nucleus (Figure 1.4, page 3). Centrioles are discussed on page 18.  Cell walls and plasmodesmata  With a light microscope, individual plant cells are more easily seen than animal cells, because they are usually larger and, unlike animal cells, surrounded by a cell wall outside the cell surface membrane. This is relatively rigid because it contains fibres of cellulose, a polysaccharide which strengthens the wall. The cell wall gives the cell a definite shape. It prevents the cell from bursting when water enters by osmosis, allowing large pressures to develop inside the cell (page 84). Cell walls may also be reinforced with extra cellulose or with a hard material called lignin for extra strength (page 141). Cell walls are freely permeable, allowing free movement of molecules and ions through to the cell surface membrane. Plant cells are linked to neighbouring cells by means of fine strands of cytoplasm called plasmodesmata (singular: plasmodesma), which pass through pore-like structures in their walls. Movement through the pores is thought to be controlled by the structure of the pores.  Vacuoles  Although animal cells may possess small vacuoles such as phagocytic vacuoles (page 87), which are temporary structures, mature plant cells often possess a large, permanent, central vacuole. The plant vacuole is surrounded by a membrane, the tonoplast, which controls exchange between the vacuole and the cytoplasm. The fluid in the vacuole is a solution of pigments, enzymes, sugars and other organic compounds (including some waste products), mineral salts, oxygen and carbon dioxide. Vacuoles help to regulate the osmotic properties of cells (the flow of water inwards and outwards) as well as having a wide range of other functions. For example, the pigments which colour the petals of certain flowers and parts of some vegetables, such as the red pigment of beetroots, may be located in vacuoles.  5  Cambridge International AS Level Biology  Chloroplasts  Chloroplasts are found in the green parts of the plant, mainly in the leaves. They are relatively large organelles and so are easily seen with a light microscope. It is even possible to see tiny ‘grains’ or grana (singular: granum) inside the chloroplasts using a light microscope. These are the parts of the chloroplast that contain chlorophyll, the green pigment which absorbs light during the process of photosynthesis, the main function of chloroplasts. Chloroplasts are discussed further on page 19.  Points to note  You can think of a plant cell as being very similar to an animal cell, but with extra structures. ■■ Plant cells are often larger than animal cells, although cell size varies enormously. ■■ Do not confuse the cell wall with the cell surface membrane. Cell walls are relatively thick and physically strong, whereas cell surface membranes are very thin. Cell walls are freely permeable, whereas cell surface membranes are partially permeable. All cells have a cell surface membrane. ■■ Vacuoles are not confined to plant cells; animal cells may have small vacuoles, such as phagocytic vacuoles, although these are not usually permanent structures. ■■  6  We return to the differences between animal and plant cells as seen using the electron microscope on page 13.  Units of measurement In order to measure objects in the microscopic world, we need to use very small units of measurement, which are unfamiliar to most people. According to international agreement, the International System of Units (SI units) should be used. In this system, the basic unit of length is the metre (symbol, m). Additional units can be created in multiples of a thousand times larger or smaller, using standard prefixes. For example, the prefix kilo means 1000 times. Thus 1 kilometre = 1000 metres. The units of length relevant to cell studies are shown in Table 1.1.  It is difficult to imagine how small these units are, but, when looking down a microscope and seeing cells clearly, we should not forget how amazingly small the cells actually are. The smallest structure visible with the human eye is about 50–100 μm in diameter. Your body contains about 60 million million cells, varying in size from about 5 μm to 40 μm. Try to imagine structures like mitochondria, which have an average diameter of 1 μm. The smallest cell organelles we deal with in this book, ribosomes, are only about 25 nm in diameter! You could line up about 20 000 ribosomes across the full stop at the end of this sentence.  Electron microscopy As we said on page 3, by 1900 almost all the structures shown in Figures 1.4 and 1.5 (pages 3 and 4) had been discovered. There followed a time of frustration for microscopists, because they realised that no matter how much the design of light microscopes improved, there was a limit to how much could ever be seen using light. In order to understand why this is, it is necessary to know something about the nature of light itself and to understand the difference between magnification and resolution.  Magnification  Magnification is the number of times larger an image is, than the real size of the object. observed size of the image actual size I M= A  magnification = or		  Here I = observed size of the image (that is, what you can measure with a ruler) and A = actual size (that is, the real size – for example, the size of a cell before it is magnified). If you know two of these values, you can work out the third one. For example, if the observed size of the image and the magnification are known, you can work out the actual size: A = I . If you write the formula in a triangle M  Fraction of a metre  Unit  Symbol  one thousandth = 0.001 = 1/1000 = 10−3  millimetre  mm  one millionth = 0.000 001 = 1/1000 000 = 10−6  micrometre  μm  one thousand millionth = 0.000 000 001 = 1/1000 000 000 = 10−9  nanometre  nm  Table 1.1 Units of measurement relevant to cell studies: μ is the Greek letter mu; 1 micrometre is a thousandth of a millimetre; 1 nanometre is a thousandth of a micrometre.  Chapter 1: Cell structure  as shown on the right and cover up the value you want to find, it should be obvious how to do the right calculation. Some worked examples are now provided.  I  ×  M  A  WORKED EXAMPLE 1  Measuring cells  Cells and organelles can be measured with a microscope by means of an eyepiece graticule. This is a transparent scale. It usually has 100 divisions (see Figure 1.8a). The eyepiece graticule is placed in the microscope eyepiece so that it can be seen at the same time as the object to be measured, as shown in Figure 1.8b. Figure 1.8b shows the scale over a human cheek epithelial cell. The cell lies between 40 and 60 on the scale. We therefore say it measures 20 eyepiece units in diameter (the difference between 60 and 40). We will not know the actual size of the eyepiece units until the eyepiece graticule scale is calibrated. To calibrate the eyepiece graticule scale, a miniature transparent ruler called a stage micrometer scale is placed on the microscope stage and is brought into focus. This scale may be etched onto a glass slide or printed on a transparent film. It commonly has subdivisions of 0.1 and 0.01 mm. The images of the two scales can then be superimposed as shown in Figure 1.8c. In the eyepiece graticule shown in the figure, 100 units measure 0.25 mm. Hence, the value of each eyepiece unit is: 0.25 = 0.0025 mm 100 Or, converting mm to μm: 0.25 × 1000 = 2.5 μm 100 The diameter of the cell shown superimposed on the scale in Figure 1.8b measures 20 eyepiece units and so its actual diameter is: 		 20 × 2.5 μm = 50 μm  a  0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100  b  cheek cells on a slide on the stage of the microscope  7 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100  c  eyepiece graticule in the eyepiece of the microscope  eyepiece graticule scale (arbitrary units)  This diameter is greater than that of many human cells because the cell is a flattened epithelial cell. 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100  0  Figure 1.8 Microscopical measurement. Three fields of view seen using a high-power (× 40) objective lens. a An eyepiece graticule scale. b Superimposed images of human cheek epithelial cells and the eyepiece graticule scale. c Superimposed images of the eyepiece graticule scale and the stage micrometer scale.  0.1  stage micrometer scale (marked in 0.0 1mm and 0.1 mm divisions)  0.2  Cambridge International AS Level Biology  WORKED EXAMPLE 2  Calculating the magnification of a photograph or image  a  To calculate M, the magnification of a photograph or an object, we can use the following method. Figure 1.9 shows two photographs of a section through the same plant cells. The magnifications of the two photographs are the same. Suppose we want to know the magnification of the plant cell labelled P in Figure 1.9b. If we know its actual (real) length we can calculate its magnification using the formula I M= A The real length of the cell is 80 μm. Step 1 Measure the length in mm of the cell in the photograph using a ruler. You should find that it is about 60 mm. Step 2 Convert mm to μm. (It is easier if we first convert all measurements to the same units – in this case micrometres, μm.) 1 mm = 1000 μm 60 mm = 60 × 1000 μm = 60 000 μm Step 3 Use the equation to calculate the magnification.  so  8  b  image size, I actual size, A 60 000 μm = 80 μm = × 750  magnification, M =  The multiplication sign in front of the number 750 means ‘times’. We say that the magnification is ‘times 750’. P  Figure 1.9 Photographs of the same types of plant cells seen a with a light microscope, b with an electron microscope, both shown at a magnification of about × 750.  QUESTION 1.2 a  b  Calculate the magnification of the drawing of the animal cell in Figure 1.4 on page 3. Calculate the actual (real) length of the chloroplast labelled X in Figure 1.29 on page 21.  Chapter 1: Cell structure  WORKED EXAMPLE 3  BOX 1.1: Making temporary slides  Calculating magnification from a scale bar  Background information  Figure 1.10 shows a lymphocyte.  6 µm 6 µm Figure 1.10 A lymphocyte.  We can calculate the magnification of the lymphocyte by simply using the scale bar. All you need to do is measure the length of the scale bar and then substitute this and the length it represents into the equation. Step 1 Measure the scale bar. Here, it is 36 mm. Step 2 Convert mm to μm: 		 36 mm = 36 × 1000 μm = 36 000 μm Step 3­  Use the equation to calculate the magnification: image size, I actual size, A 36 000 μm = 6 μm = × 6000  magnification, M =  WORKED EXAMPLE 4  Calculating the real size of an object from its magnification  To calculate A, the real or actual size of an object, we can use the following method. Figure 1.27 on page 19 shows parts of three plant cells magnified × 5600. One of the chloroplasts is labelled ‘chloroplast’ in the figure. Suppose we want to know the actual length of this chloroplast. Step 1 Measure the observed length of the image of the chloroplast (I  ), in mm, using a ruler. The maximum length is 40 mm. Step 2 Convert mm to μm: 		 40 mm = 40 × 1000 μm = 40 000 μm Step 3 Use the equation to calculate the actual length: image size, I magnification, M 40 000 μm = 5600 = 7.1 μm (to one decimal place)  actual size, A =  Biological material may be examined live or in a preserved state. Prepared slides contain material that has been killed and preserved in a life-like condition. This material is often cut into thin sections to enable light to pass through the structures for viewing with a light microscope. The sections are typically stained and ‘mounted’ on a glass slide, forming a permanent preparation. Temporary preparations of fresh material have the advantage that they can be made rapidly and are useful for quick preliminary investigations. Sectioning and staining may still be carried out if required. Sometimes macerated (chopped up) material can be used, as when examining the structure of wood (xylem). A number of temporary stains are commonly used. For example, iodine in potassium iodide solution is useful for plant specimens. It stains starch blueblack and will also colour nuclei and cell walls a pale yellow. A dilute solution of methylene blue can be used to stain animal cells such as cheek cells. Viewing specimens yourself with a microscope will help you to understand and remember structures more fully. This can be reinforced by making a pencil drawing on good quality plain paper, using the guidance given later in Chapter 7 (Box 7.1, page 129). Remember always to draw what you see, and not what you think you should see.  Procedure  The material is placed on a clean glass slide and one or two drops of stain added. A cover slip is carefully lowered over the specimen to protect the microscope lens and to help prevent the specimen from drying out. A drop of glycerine mixed with the stain can also help prevent drying out. Suitable animal material: human cheek cells Suitable plant material: onion epidermal cells, lettuce epidermal cells, Chlorella cells, moss leaves  9  Cambridge International AS Level Biology  Resolution  10  Look again at Figure 1.9 (page 8). Figure 1.9a is a light micrograph (a photograph taken with a light microscope, also known as a photomicrograph). Figure 1.9b is an electron micrograph of the same specimen taken at the same magnification (an electron micrograph is a picture taken with an electron microscope). You can see that Figure 1.9b, the electron micrograph, is much clearer. This is because it has greater resolution. Resolution can be defined as the ability to distinguish between two separate points. If the two points cannot be resolved, they will be seen as one point. In practice, resolution is the amount of detail that can be seen – the greater the resolution, the greater the detail. The maximum resolution of a light microscope is 200 nm. This means that if two points or objects are closer together than 200 nm they cannot be distinguished as separate. It is possible to take a photograph such as Figure 1.9a and to magnify (enlarge) it, but we see no more detail; in other words, we do not improve resolution, even though we often enlarge photographs because they are easier to see when larger. With a microscope, magnification up to the limit of resolution can reveal further detail, but any further magnification increases blurring as well as the size of the image. Resolution is the ability to distinguish between two objects very close together; the higher the resolution of an image, the greater the detail that can be seen. Magnification is the number of times greater that an image is than the actual object; magnification = image size ÷ actual (real) size of the object.  X-rays  The electromagnetic spectrum  How is resolution linked with the nature of light? One of the properties of light is that it travels in waves. The length of the waves of visible light varies, ranging from about 400 nm (violet light) to about 700 nm (red light). The human eye can distinguish between these different wavelengths, and in the brain the differences are converted to colour differences. (Colour is an invention of the brain!) The whole range of different wavelengths is called the electromagnetic spectrum. Visible light is only one part of this spectrum. Figure 1.11 shows some of the parts of the electromagnetic spectrum. The longer the waves, the lower their frequency (all the waves travel at the same speed, so imagine them passing a post: shorter waves pass at higher frequency). In theory, there is no limit to how short or how long the waves can be. Wavelength changes with energy: the greater the energy, the shorter the wavelength. Now look at Figure 1.12, which shows a mitochondrion, some very small cell organelles called ribosomes (page 15) and light of 400 nm wavelength, the shortest visible wavelength. The mitochondrion is large enough to interfere with the light waves. However, the ribosomes are far too small to have any effect on the light waves. The general rule is that the limit of resolution is about one half the wavelength of the radiation used to view the specimen. In other words, if an object is any smaller than half the wavelength of the radiation used to view it, it cannot be seen separately from nearby objects. This means that the best resolution that can be obtained using a microscope that uses visible light (a light microscope) is 200 nm, since the shortest wavelength of visible light is 400 nm (violet light). In practice, this corresponds to a maximum useful magnification of about 1500 times. Ribosomes are approximately 25 nm in diameter and can therefore never be seen using light.  infrared microwaves  gamma rays  0.1 nm  uv  10 nm  radio and TV waves  1000 nm  105 nm  107 nm  109 nm  1011 nm  1013 nm  visible light 400 nm 600 nm 500 nm violet blue green yellow orange  700 nm red  Figure 1.11 Diagram of the electromagnetic spectrum (the waves are not drawn to scale). The numbers indicate the wavelengths of the different types of electromagnetic radiation. Visible light is a form of electromagnetic radiation. The arrow labelled uv is ultraviolet light.  Chapter 1: Cell structure  wavelength 400 nm  stained mitochondrion of diameter 1000 nm interferes with light waves  wavelength is extremely short (at least as short as that of X-rays). Second, because they are negatively charged, they can be focused easily using electromagnets (a magnet can be made to alter the path of the beam, the equivalent of a glass lens bending light). Using an electron microscope, a resolution of 0.5 nm can be obtained, 400 times better than a light microscope.  Transmission and scanning electron microscopes  stained ribosomes of diameter 25 nm do not interfere with light waves  Figure 1.12 A mitochondrion and some ribosomes in the path of light waves of 400 nm length.  If an object is transparent, it will allow light waves to pass through it and therefore will still not be visible. This is why many biological structures have to be stained before they can be seen. QUESTION 1.3 Explain why ribosomes are not visible using a light  microscope.  The electron microscope  Biologists, faced with the problem that they would never see anything smaller than 200 nm using a light microscope, realised that the only solution would be to use radiation of a shorter wavelength than light. If you study Figure 1.11, you will see that ultraviolet light, or better still X-rays, look like possible candidates. Both ultraviolet and X-ray microscopes have been built, the latter with little success partly because of the difficulty of focusing X-rays. A much better solution is to use electrons. Electrons are negatively charged particles which orbit the nucleus of an atom. When a metal becomes very hot, some of its electrons gain so much energy that they escape from their orbits, like a rocket escaping from Earth’s gravity. Free electrons behave like electromagnetic radiation. They have a very short wavelength: the greater the energy, the shorter the wavelength. Electrons are a very suitable form of radiation for microscopy for two major reasons. Firstly, their  Two types of electron microscope are now in common use. The transmission electron microscope, or TEM, was the type originally developed. Here the beam of electrons is passed through the specimen before being viewed. Only those electrons that are transmitted (pass through the specimen) are seen. This allows us to see thin sections of specimens, and thus to see inside cells. In the scanning electron microscope (SEM), on the other hand, the electron beam is used to scan the surfaces of structures, and only the reflected beam is observed. An example of a scanning electron micrograph is shown in Figure 1.13. The advantage of this microscope is that surface structures can be seen. Also, great depth of field is obtained so that much of the specimen is in focus at the same time and a three-dimensional appearance is achieved. Such a picture would be impossible to obtain with a light microscope, even using the same magnification and resolution, because you would have to keep focusing up and down with the objective lens to see different parts of the specimen. The disadvantage of the SEM is that it cannot achieve the same resolution as a TEM. Using an SEM, resolution is between 3 nm and 20 nm.  Figure 1.13 False-colour scanning electron micrograph of the head of a cat flea (× 100).  11  Cambridge International AS Level Biology  Viewing specimens with the electron microscope  Figure 1.14 shows how an electron microscope works and Figure 1.15 shows one in use. It is not possible to see an electron beam, so to make the image visible the electron beam has to be projected onto a fluorescent screen. The areas hit by electrons shine brightly, giving overall a black and white picture. The stains used to improve the contrast of biological specimens for electron microscopy contain heavy metal atoms, which stop the passage of electrons. The resulting picture is like an X-ray photograph, with the more densely stained parts of the specimen appearing blacker. ‘False-colour’ images can be created by colouring the standard black and white image using a computer.  To add to the difficulties of electron microscopy, the electron beam, and therefore the specimen and the fluorescent screen, must be in a vacuum. If electrons collided with air molecules, they would scatter, making it impossible to achieve a sharp picture. Also, water boils at room temperature in a vacuum, so all specimens must be dehydrated before being placed in the microscope. This means that only dead material can be examined. Great efforts are therefore made to try to preserve material in a life-like state when preparing it for electron microscopy.  electron gun and anode – produce a beam of electrons electron beam vacuum  12  pathway of electrons condenser electromagnetic lens – directs the electron beam onto the specimen  specimen is placed on a grid  objective electromagnetic lens – produces an image  projector electromagnetic lenses – focus the magnified image onto the screen  screen or photographic plate – shows the image of the specimen  Figure 1.14 How an electron microscope (EM) works.  Figure 1.15 A transmission electron microscope (TEM) in use.  Chapter 1: Cell structure  Ultrastructure of an animal cell The fine (detailed) structure of a cell as revealed by the electron microscope is called its ultrastructure.  Figure 1.16 shows the appearance of typical animal cells as seen with an electron microscope, and Figure 1.17 is a diagram based on many other such micrographs.  cell surface membrane Golgi body  lysosome  mitochondria 13  nucleolus  endoplasmic reticulum nucleus  glycogen granules  microvillus  chromatin  nuclear envelope ribosomes  Figure 1.16 Representative animal cells as seen with a TEM. The cells are liver cells from a rat (× 9600). The nucleus is clearly visible in one of the cells.  Cambridge International AS Level Biology  centrosome with two centrioles close to the nucleus and at right angles to each other  microvilli  Golgi vesicle Golgi body microtubules radiating from centrosome  lysosome  ribosomes  mitochondrion  cell surface membrane rough endoplasmic reticulum cytoplasm nucleolus chromatin nucleus  smooth endoplasmic reticulum  nuclear pore nuclear envelope (two membranes)  14  Figure 1.17 Ultrastructure of a typical animal cell as seen with an electron microscope. In reality, the ER is more extensive than shown, and free ribosomes may be more extensive. Glycogen granules are sometimes present in the cytoplasm.  QUESTION 1.4 Compare Figure 1.17 with Figure 1.4 on page 3. Name  the structures in an animal cell which can be seen with the electron microscope but not with the light microscope.  Structures and functions of organelles  Compartmentalisation and division of labour within the cell are even more obvious with an electron microscope than with a light microscope. We will now consider the structures and functions of some of the cell components in more detail.  Nucleus  The nucleus (Figure 1.18) is the largest cell organelle. It is surrounded by two membranes known as the nuclear envelope. The outer membrane of the nuclear envelope is continuous with the endoplasmic reticulum (Figure 1.17).  Figure 1.18 Transmission electron micrograph of the nucleus of a cell from the pancreas of a bat (× 7500). The circular nucleus is surrounded by a double-layered nuclear envelope containing nuclear pores. The nucleolus is more darkly stained. Rough ER (page 15) is visible in the surrounding cytoplasm.  Chapter 1: Cell structure  The nuclear envelope has many small pores called nuclear pores. These allow and control exchange between the nucleus and the cytoplasm. Examples of substances leaving the nucleus through the pores are mRNA and ribosomes for protein synthesis. Examples of substances entering through the nuclear pores are proteins to help make ribosomes, nucleotides, ATP (adenosine triphosphate) and some hormones such as thyroid hormone T3. Within the nucleus, the chromosomes are in a loosely coiled state known as chromatin (except during nuclear division, Chapter 5). Chromosomes contain DNA, which is organised into functional units called genes. Genes control the activities of the cell and inheritance; thus the nucleus controls the cell’s activities. When a cell is about to divide, the nucleus divides first so that each new cell will have its own nucleus (Chapters 5 and 16). Also within the nucleus, the nucleolus makes ribosomes, using the information in its own DNA.  Endoplasmic reticulum and ribosomes  When cells were first seen with the electron microscope, biologists were amazed to see so much detailed structure. The existence of much of this had not been suspected. This was particularly true of an extensive system of membranes running through the cytoplasm, which became known as the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (Figures 1.18, 1.19 and 1.22). The membranes form an extended system  of flattened compartments, called sacs, spreading throughout the cell. Processes can take place inside these sacs, separated from the cytoplasm. The sacs can be interconnected to form a complete system (reticulum) – the connections have been compared to the way in which the different levels of a parking lot are connected by ramps. The ER is continuous with the outer membrane of the nuclear envelope (Figure 1.17). There are two types of ER: rough ER and smooth ER. Rough ER is so called because it is covered with many tiny organelles called ribosomes. These are just visible as black dots in Figures 1.18 and 1.19. At very high magnifications they can be seen to consist of two subunits: a large and a small subunit. Ribosomes are the sites of protein synthesis (page 119). They can be found free in the cytoplasm as well as on the rough ER. They are very small, only about 25 nm in diameter. They are made of RNA (ribonucleic acid) and protein. Proteins made by the ribosomes on the rough ER enter the sacs and move through them. The proteins are often modified in some way on their journey. Small sacs called vesicles can break off from the ER and these can join together to form the Golgi body. They form part of the secretory pathway because the proteins can be exported from the cell via the Golgi vesicles (Figure 1.2). Smooth ER, so called because it lacks ribosomes, has a completely different function. It makes lipids and steroids, such as cholesterol and the reproductive hormones oestrogen and testosterone.  Golgi body (Golgi apparatus or Golgi complex)  Figure 1.19 Transmission electron micrograph of rough ER covered with ribosomes (black dots) (× 17 000). Some free ribosomes can also be seen in the cytoplasm on the left.  The Golgi body is a stack of flattened sacs (Figure 1.20). More than one Golgi body may be present in a cell. The stack is constantly being formed at one end from vesicles which bud off from the ER, and broken down again at the other end to form Golgi vesicles. The stack of sacs together with the associated vesicles is referred to as the Golgi apparatus or Golgi complex. The Golgi body collects, processes and sorts molecules (particularly proteins from the rough ER), ready for transport in Golgi vesicles either to other parts of the cell or out of the cell (secretion). Two examples of protein processing in the Golgi body are the addition of sugars to proteins to make molecules known as glycoproteins, and the removal of the first amino acid, methionine, from newly formed proteins to make a functioning protein. In plants, enzymes in the Golgi body convert sugars into cell wall components. Golgi vesicles are also used to make lysosomes.  15  Cambridge International AS Level Biology  Mitochondria Structure  Figure 1.20 Transmission electron micrograph of a Golgi body. A central stack of saucer-shaped sacs can be seen budding off small Golgi vesicles (green). These may form secretory vesicles whose contents can be released at the cell surface by exocytosis (page 87).  Lysosomes  16  Lysosomes (Figure 1.21) are spherical sacs, surrounded by a single membrane and having no internal structure. They are commonly 0.1– 0.5 μm in diameter. They contain digestive (hydrolytic) enzymes which must be kept separate from the rest of the cell to prevent damage from being done. Lysosomes are responsible for the breakdown (digestion) of unwanted structures such as old organelles or even whole cells, as in mammary glands after lactation (breast feeding). In white blood cells, lysosomes are used to digest bacteria (see endocytosis, page 87). Enzymes are sometimes released outside the cell – for example, in the replacement of cartilage with bone during development. The heads of sperm contain a special lysosome, the acrosome, for digesting a path to the ovum (egg).  Figure 1.21 Lysosomes (orange) in a mouse kidney cell (× 55 000). They contain cell structures in the process of digestion, and vesicles (green). Cytoplasm is coloured blue here.  The structure of the mitochondrion as seen with the electron microscope is visible in Figures 1.16, 1.22, 12.13 and 12.14. Mitochondria (singular: mitochondrion) are usually about 1 μm in diameter and can be various shapes, often sausage-shaped as in Figure 1.22. They are surrounded by two membranes (an envelope). The inner of these is folded to form finger-like cristae which project into the interior solution, or matrix. The space between the two membranes is called the intermembrane space. The outer membrane contains a transport protein called porin, which forms wide aqueous channels allowing easy access of small, water-soluble molecules from the surrounding cytoplasm into the intermembrane space. The inner membrane is a far more selective barrier and controls precisely what ions and molecules can enter the matrix. The number of mitochondria in a cell is very variable. As they are responsible for aerobic respiration, it is not surprising that cells with a high demand for energy, such as liver and muscle cells, contain large numbers of mitochondria. A liver cell may contain as many as 2000 mitochondria. If you exercise regularly, your muscles will make more mitochondria.  Function of mitochondria and the role of ATP As we have seen, the main function of mitochondria is to carry out aerobic respiration, although they do have other functions, such as the synthesis of lipids. During  Figure 1.22 Mitochondrion (orange) with its double membrane (envelope); the inner membrane is folded to form cristae (× 20 000). Mitochondria are the sites of aerobic cell respiration. Note also the rough ER.  Chapter 1: Cell structure  respiration, a series of reactions takes place in which energy is released from energy-rich molecules such as sugars and fats. Most of this energy is transferred to molecules of ATP. ATP (adenosine triphosphate) is the energy-carrying molecule found in all living cells. It is known as the universal energy carrier. The reactions of respiration take place in solution in the matrix and in the inner membrane (cristae). The matrix contains enzymes in solution, including those of the Krebs cycle (Chapter 12) and these supply the hydrogen and electrons to the reactions that take place in the cristae. The flow of electrons along the precisely placed electron carriers in the membranes of the cristae is what provides the power to generate ATP molecules, as explained in Chapter 12. The folding of the cristae increases the efficiency of respiration because it increases the surface area available for these reactions to take place. Once made, ATP leaves the mitochondrion and, as it is a small, soluble molecule, it can spread rapidly to all parts of the cell where energy is needed. Its energy is released by breaking the molecule down to ADP (adenosine diphosphate). This is a hydrolysis reaction. The ADP can then be recycled into a mitochondrion for conversion back to ATP during aerobic respiration.  The endosymbiont theory  In the 1960s, it was discovered that mitochondria and chloroplasts contain ribosomes which are slightly smaller than those in the cytoplasm and are the same size as those found in bacteria. The size of ribosomes is measured in ‘S units’, which are a measure of how fast they sediment in a centrifuge. Cytoplasmic ribosomes are 80S, while those of bacteria, mitochondria and ribosomes are 70S. It was also discovered in the 1960s that mitochondria and chloroplasts contain small, circular DNA molecules, also like those found in bacteria. It was later proved that mitochondria and chloroplasts are, in effect, ancient bacteria which now live inside the larger cells typical of animals and plants (see prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, page 21). This is known as the endosymbiont theory. ‘Endo’ means ‘inside’ and a ‘symbiont’ is an organism which lives in a mutually beneficial relationship with another organism. The DNA and ribosomes of mitochondria and chloroplasts are still active and responsible for the coding and synthesis of certain vital proteins, but mitochondria and chloroplasts can no longer live independently. Mitochondrial ribosomes are just visible as tiny dark orange dots in the mitochondrial matrix in Figure 1.22.  Cell surface membrane  The cell surface membrane is extremely thin (about 7 nm). However, at very high magnifications, at least × 100 000, it can be seen to have three layers, described as a trilaminar appearance. This consists of two dark lines (heavily stained) either side of a narrow, pale interior (Figure 1.23). The membrane is partially permeable and controls exchange between the cell and its environment. Membrane structure is discussed further in Chapter 4.  Figure 1.23 Cell surface membrane (× 250 000). At this magnification the membrane appears as two dark lines at the edge of the cell.  Microvilli  Microvilli (singular: microvillus) are finger-like extensions of the cell surface membrane, typical of certain epithelial cells (cells covering surfaces of structures). They greatly increase the surface area of the cell surface membrane (Figure 1.17 on page 14). This is useful, for example, for absorption in the gut and for reabsorption in the proximal convoluted tubules of the kidney (page 308).  Microtubules and microtubule organising centres (MTOCs) Microtubules are long, rigid, hollow tubes found in the cytoplasm. They are very small, about 25 nm in diameter. Together with actin filaments and intermediate filaments (not discussed in this book), they make up the cytoskeleton, an essential structural component of cells which helps to determine cell shape. Microtubules are made of a protein called tubulin. Tubulin has two forms, α-tubulin (alpha-tubulin) and β -tubulin (beta-tubulin). α- and β -tubulin molecules combine to form dimers (double molecules). These dimers are then joined end to end to form long ‘protofilaments’. This is an example of polymerisation. Thirteen protofilaments then line up alongside each other in a ring to form a cylinder with a hollow centre. This cylinder is the microtubule. Figure 1.24 (overleaf) shows the helical pattern formed by neighbouring α- and β -tubulin molecules.  17  Cambridge International AS Level Biology  Apart from their mechanical function of support, microtubules have a number of other functions. Secretory vesicles and other organelles and cell components can be moved along the outside surfaces of the microtubules, forming an intracellular transport system. Membranebound organelles are held in place by the cytoskeleton. During nuclear division (Chapter 5), the spindle used for the separation of chromatids or chromosomes is made of microtubules, and microtubules form part of the structure dimer of centrioles. The assembly of microtubules from tubulin dimer locations in cells called molecules is controlled by special 5 nm  a  dimer 5 nm  25 nm  dimers can reversibly attach to a microtubule  5 nm appearance in 25 nm cross section  dimers can reversibly attach to a microtubule  appearance in 25 nm cross section  dimers can reversibly attach to a microtubule  appearance in cross section  microtubule organising centres (MTOCs). These are discussed further in the following section on centrioles. Because of their simple construction, microtubules can be formed and broken down very easily at the MTOCs, according to need.  Centrioles and centrosomes  The extra resolution of the electron microscope reveals that just outside the nucleus of animal cells there are really two centrioles and not one as it appears under the light microscope (compare Figures 1.4 and 1.17). They lie close together and at right angles to each other in a region known as the centrosome. Centrioles and the centrosome are absent from most plant cells. A centriole is a hollow cylinder about 500 nm long, formed from a ring of short microtubules. Each centriole contains nine triplets of microtubules (Figures 1.25 and 1.26). triplet of microtubules (one complete microtubule and two partial microtubules)  18  500 nm  The dimers have a helical arrangement. The dimers have a b helical arrangement. The dimers have a helical arrangement.  The dimers form 13 protofilaments around a hollow core. The dimers form 13 protofilaments around a hollow core. The dimers form 13 protofilaments around a hollow core.  200 nm  Figure 1.25 The structure of a centriole. It consists of nine groups of microtubules arranged in triplets.  Figure 1.24 a The structure of a microtubule and b the arrangement of microtubules in two cells. The microtubules are coloured yellow.  Figure 1.26 Centrioles in transverse and longitudinal section (TS and LS) (× 86 000). The one on the left is seen in TS and clearly shows the nine triplets of microtubules which make up the structure.  Chapter 1: Cell structure  The function of the centrioles remains a mystery. Until recently, it was believed that they acted as MTOCs for the assembly of the microtubules that make up the spindle during nuclear division (Chapter 5). It is now known that this is done by the centrosome, but does not involve the centrioles. Centrioles found at the bases of cilia (page 189) and flagella, where they are known as basal bodies, do act as MTOCs. The microtubules that extend from the basal bodies into the cilia and flagella are essential for the beating movements of these organelles.  Ultrastructure of a plant cell All the structures so far described in animal cells are also found in plant cells, with the exception of centrioles and microvilli. The plant cell structures that are not found in animal cells are the cell wall, the large central vacuole, and chloroplasts. These are all shown clearly in Figures 1.27 and 1.28. The structures and functions of cell walls and vacuoles have been described on page 5.  Chloroplasts  The structure of the chloroplast as seen with the electron microscope is visible in Figures 1.27–1.29 and at a higher resolution in Figure 13.6. Chloroplasts tend to have an elongated shape and a diameter of about 3 to 10 μm (compare 1 μm diameter for mitochondria). Like mitochondria, they are surrounded by two membranes, forming the chloroplast envelope. Also like mitochondria, chloroplasts replicate themselves independently of cell division by dividing into two. The main function of chloroplasts is to carry out photosynthesis. Chloroplasts are an excellent example of how structure is related to function, so a brief understanding of their function will help you to understand their structure. During the first stage of photosynthesis (the light dependent stage) light energy is absorbed by photosynthetic pigments, particularly the green pigment chlorophyll. Some of this energy is used to manufacture ATP from ADP. An essential stage in the process is the ribosome cell surface membrane  19  vacuole nuclear envelope heterochromatin euchromatin  tonoplast  nucleolus nuclear pore  chloroplast cell wall endoplasmic reticulum mitochondrion starch grain Golgi body  Figure 1.27 A representative plant cell as seen with a TEM. The cell is a palisade cell from a soya bean leaf (× 5600).  Cambridge International AS Level Biology  splitting of water into hydrogen and oxygen. The hydrogen is used as the fuel which is oxidised to provide the energy to make the ATP. This process, as in mitochondria, requires electron transport in membranes. This explains why chloroplasts contain a complex system of membranes. The membrane system is highly organised. It consists of fluid-filled sacs called thylakoids which spread out like sheets in three dimensions. In places, the thylakoids form flat, disc-like structures that stack up like piles of coins many layers deep, forming structures called grana (from their appearance in the light microscope; ‘grana’ means grains). These membranes contain the photosynthetic pigments and electron carriers needed for the light dependent stage of photosynthesis. Both the membranes and whole chloroplasts can change their orientation within the cell in order to receive the maximum amount of light. The second stage of photosynthesis (the light independent stage) uses the energy and reducing power generated during the first stage to convert carbon dioxide into sugars. This requires a cycle of enzyme-controlled reactions called the Calvin cycle and takes place in solution in the stroma (the equivalent of the matrix in  mitochondria). The sugars made may be stored in the form of starch grains in the stroma (Figures 1.27 and 13.6). The lipid droplets also seen in the stroma as black spheres in electron micrographs (Figure 1.29) are reserves of lipid for making membranes or from the breakdown of membranes in the chloroplast. Like mitochondria, chloroplasts have their own protein synthesising machinery, including 70S ribosomes and a circular strand of DNA. In electron micrographs, the ribosomes can just be seen as small black dots in the stroma (Figure 13.6, page 291). Fibres of DNA can also sometimes be seen in small, clear areas in the stroma. As with mitochondria, it has been shown that chloroplasts originated as endosymbiotic bacteria, in this case photosynthetic blue-green bacteria. The endosymbiont theory is discussed in more detail on page 17. QUESTION 1.5 Compare Figure 1.28 with Figure 1.5 on page 4. Name  the structures in a plant cell which can be seen with the electron microscope but not with the light microscope.  20 middle lamella plasmodesma  chloroplast cytoplasm Golgi body Golgi vesicle  cell walls of neighbouring cells vacuole  tonoplast cell sap  mitochondrion smooth ER cell surface membrane (pressed against cell wall) ribosomes  nucleus  nuclear pore nucleolus chromatin nuclear envelope  envelope grana rough ER  microtubule  chloroplast  Figure 1.28 Ultrastructure of a typical plant cell as seen with the electron microscope. In reality, the ER is more extensive than shown. Free ribosomes may also be more extensive.  Chapter 1: Cell structure  additional structures sometimes present  structures always present  flagellum for locomotion; very simple structure  X  capsule additional protection infolding of cell surface membrane may form a photosynthetic membrane or carry out nitrogen fixation  Figure 1.29 Chloroplasts (× 16 000). Thylakoids (yellow) run through the stroma (dark green) and are stacked in places to form grana. Black circles among the thylakoids are lipid droplets. See also Figure 13.6, page 291. Chloroplast X is referred to in Question 1.2.  Two fundamentally different types of cell At one time it was common practice to try to classify all living organisms as either animals or plants. With advances in our knowledge of living things, it has become obvious that the living world is not that simple. Fungi and bacteria, for example, are very different from animals and plants, and from each other. Eventually it was discovered that there are two fundamentally different types of cell. The most obvious difference between these types is that one possesses a nucleus and the other does not. Organisms that lack nuclei are called prokaryotes (‘pro’ means before; ‘karyon’ means nucleus). They are, on average, about 1000 to 10 000 times smaller in volume than cells with nuclei, and are much simpler in structure – for example, their DNA lies free in the cytoplasm. Organisms whose cells possess nuclei are called eukaryotes (‘eu’ means true). Their DNA lies inside a nucleus. Eukaryotes include animals, plants, fungi and a group containing most of the unicellular eukaryotes known as protoctists. Most biologists believe that eukaryotes evolved from prokaryotes, 1500 million years after prokaryotes first appeared on Earth. We mainly study animals and plants in this book, but all eukaryotic cells have certain features in common. A generalised prokaryotic cell is shown in Figure 1.30. A comparison of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells is given in Table 1.2.  plasmid small circle of DNA; several may be present pili for attachment to other cells or surfaces; involved in sexual reproduction  cell wall containing murein, a peptidoglycan cell surface membrane cytoplasm circular DNA sometimes referred to as a chromosome ribosomes  Figure 1.30 Diagram of a generalised bacterium showing the typical features of a prokaryotic cell.  QUESTION 1.6 List the structural features that prokaryotic and  eukaryotic cells have in common. Briefly explain why each of the structures you have listed is essential.  Viruses  In 1852, a Russian scientist discovered that certain diseases could be transmitted by agents that, unlike bacteria, could pass through the finest filters. This was the first evidence for the existence of viruses, tiny ‘organisms’ which are much smaller than bacteria and are on the boundary between what we think of as living and non-living. Unlike prokaryotes and eukaryotes, viruses do not have a cell structure. In other words, they are not surrounded by a partially permeable membrane containing cytoplasm with ribosomes. They are much simpler in structure. Most consist only of: a self-replicating molecule of DNA or RNA which acts as its genetic code ■■ a protective coat of protein molecules. ■■  21  Cambridge International AS Level Biology  Prokaryotes  Eukaryotes  average diameter of cell is 0.5–5 μm  cells commonly up to 40 μm diameter and commonly 1000–10 000 times the volume of prokaryotic cells  DNA is circular and lies free in the cytoplasm  DNA is not circular and is contained in a nucleus – the nucleus is surrounded by an envelope of two membranes  DNA is naked  DNA is associated with protein, forming structures called chromosomes  slightly smaller (70S) ribosomes (about 20 nm diameter) than those of eukaryotes  slightly larger (80S) ribosomes (about 25 nm diameter) than those of prokaryotes  no ER present  ER present, to which ribosomes may be attached  very few cell organelles – no separate membrane-bound compartments unless formed by infolding of the cell surface membrane  many types of cell organelle present (extensive compartmentalisation and division of labour): ■  some organelles are bounded by a single membrane, e.g. lysosomes, Golgi body, vacuoles ■  some are bounded by two membranes (an envelope), e.g. nucleus, mitochondrion, chloroplast ■  some have no membrane, e.g. ribosomes, centrioles, microtubules  cell wall present – wall contains murein, a peptidoglycan (a polysaccharide combined with amino acids)  cell wall sometimes present, e.g. in plants and fungi – contains cellulose or lignin in plants, and chitin (a nitrogen-containing polysaccharide similar to cellulose) in fungi  Table 1.2 A comparison of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells.  22  capsid  Figure 1.31 shows the structure of a simple virus. It has a very symmetrical shape. Its protein coat (or capsid) is made up of separate protein molecules, each of which is called a capsomere. Viruses range in size from about 20–300 nm (about 50 times smaller on average than bacteria). All viruses are parasitic because they can only reproduce by infecting and taking over living cells. The virus DNA or RNA takes over the protein synthesising machinery of the host cell, which then helps to make new virus particles.  protein molecules  DNA or RNA genetic code  Figure 1.31 The structure of a simple virus.  Summary ■■  The basic unit of life, the cell, can be seen clearly only with the aid of microscopes. The light microscope uses light as a source of radiation, whereas the electron microscope uses electrons. The electron microscope has greater resolution (allows more detail to be seen) than the light microscope, because electrons have a shorter wavelength than light.  ■■  With a light microscope, cells may be measured using an eyepiece graticule and a stage micrometer. Using the formula A =  I the actual size of an object (A) or its M  magnification (M) can be found if its observed (image) size (I) is measured and A or M, as appropriate, is known. ■■  All cells are surrounded by a partially permeable cell surface membrane that controls exchange between the cell and its environment. All cells contain genetic material in the form of DNA, and ribosomes for protein synthesis.  Chapter 1: Cell structure  ■■  The simplest cells are prokaryotic cells, which are thought to have evolved before, and given rise to, the much more complex and much larger eukaryotic cells. Prokaryotic cells lack a true nucleus and have smaller (70S) ribosomes than eukaryotic cells. They also lack membrane-bound organelles. Their DNA is circular and lies naked in the cytoplasm.  ■■  All eukaryotic cells possess a nucleus containing one or more nucleoli and DNA. The DNA is linear and bound to proteins to form chromatin.  ■■  The cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells contains many membrane-bound organelles providing separate compartments for specialised activities (division of labour). Organelles of eukaryotic cells include endoplasmic reticulum (ER), 80S ribosomes, mitochondria, Golgi apparatus and lysosomes. Animal cells also contain a centrosome and centrioles. Plant cells may contain chloroplasts, often have a large, permanent, central vacuole and have a cell wall containing cellulose.  End-of-chapter questions 1 Which one of the following cell structures can be seen with a light microscope? A mitochondrion B ribosome C rough ER D smooth ER  [1] 23  2 The use of electrons as a source of radiation in the electron microscope allows high resolution to be achieved because electrons: A are negatively charged. B can be focused using electromagnets. C have a very short wavelength. D travel at the speed of light.  [1]  3 Which one of the following structures is found in animal cells, but not in plant cells? A cell surface membrane B centriole C chloroplast D Golgi body  [1]  4 Copy and complete the following table, which compares light microscopes with electron microscopes. Some boxes have been filled in for you. Feature source of radiation wavelength of radiation used maximum resolution lenses specimen stains image  Light microscope  Electron microscope about 0.005 nm 0.5 nm in practice  glass non-living or dead coloured dyes coloured  [8]  Cambridge International AS Level Biology  5 List ten structures you could find in an electron micrograph of an animal cell which would be absent from the cell of a bacterium.  [10]  6 Advice on answering question 6: If you are asked to distinguish between two things, it is likely that it is because they have certain things in common and that they may even be confused with each other. In your answer it is helpful where relevant to point out similarities as well as differences. Remember that for organelles there may be differences in both structure and function. Distinguish between the following pairs of terms: a magnification and resolution b light microscope and electron microscope c nucleus and nucleolus d chromatin and chromosome e membrane and envelope f smooth ER and rough ER g prokaryote and eukaryote  24  [3] [2] [4] [3] [3] [4] [4] [Total: 23]  7 List: a three organelles each lacking a boundary membrane b three organelles each bounded by a single membrane c three organelles each bounded by two membranes (an envelope)  [9]  8 Identify each cell structure or organelle from its description below. a manufactures lysosomes b manufactures ribosomes c site of protein synthesis d can bud off vesicles which form the Golgi body e can transport newly synthesised protein round the cell f manufactures ATP in animal and plant cells g controls the activity of the cell, because it contains the DNA h carries out photosynthesis i can act as a starting point for the growth of spindle microtubules during cell division j contains chromatin k partially permeable barrier only about 7 nm thick l organelle about 25 nm in diameter  [12]  9 The electron micrograph on page 25 shows part of a secretory cell from the pancreas. The secretory vesicles are Golgi vesicles and appear as dark round structures. The magnification is × 8000. a Copy and complete the table. Use a ruler to help you find the actual sizes of the structures. Give your answers in micrometres. Structure  Observed diameter (measured with ruler)  Actual size  maximum diameter of a Golgi vesicle maximum diameter of nucleus maximum length of the labelled mitochondrion  [9]  Chapter 1: Cell structure  b Make a fully labelled drawing of representative parts of the cell. You do not have to draw everything, but enough to show the structures of the main organelles. Use a full page of plain paper and a sharp pencil. Use Figures 1.16 and 1.17 in this book and the simplified diagram in d below to help you identify the structures. c The mitochondria in pancreatic cells are mostly sausage-shaped in three dimensions. Explain why some of the mitochondria in the electron micrograph below appear roughly circular.  [14] [1]  mitochondrion  secretory vesicle  25  d The figure below shows a diagram based on an electron micrograph of a secretory cell from the pancreas. This type of cell is specialised for secreting (exporting) proteins. Some of the proteins are digestive enzymes of the pancreatic juice. The cell is very active, requiring a lot of energy. The arrows show the route taken by the protein molecules. A magnified E  A  C B  D  protein (enzyme) molecules  i Describe briefly what is happening at each of the stages A, B, C and D. ii Name one molecule or structure which leaves the nucleus by route E. iii Through which structure must the molecule or structure you named in ii pass to get through the nuclear envelope? iv Name the molecule which leaves the mitochondrion in order to provide energy for this cell.  [8] [1] [1] [1] [Total: 35]  Cambridge International AS Level Biology  10 One technique used to investigate the activity of cell organelles is called differential centrifugation. In this technique, a tissue is homogenised (ground in a blender), placed in tubes and spun in a centrifuge. This makes organelles sediment (settle) to the bottom of the tubes. The larger the organelles, the faster they sediment. By repeating the process at faster and faster speeds, the organelles can be separated from each other according to size. Some liver tissue was treated in this way to separate ribosomes, nuclei and mitochondria. The centrifuge was spun at 1000 g, 10 000 g or 100 000 g (‘g ’ is gravitational force). a In which of the three sediments – 1000 g, 10 000 g or 100 000 g – would you expect to find the following? i ribosomes ii nuclei iii mitochondria b Liver tissue contains many lysosomes. Suggest why this makes it difficult to study mitochondria using the differential centrifugation technique.  [1] [4]  [Total: 5]  26  27  27  Chapter 2:  Biological molecules Learning outcomes You should be able to: ■  ■  describe how large biological molecules are made from smaller molecules describe the structure and function of carbohydrates, lipids and proteins  ■  ■  carry out biochemical tests to identify carbohydrates, lipids and proteins explain some key properties of water that make life possible  